---
title: Authenticity
layout: post
date: 2025-05-30
---

When I was in college, I had a period when I was obsessed with authenticity. I never defined it, but my big concern was being true to myself, as a guide for how to live my life. I aimed to be guided by rationality, and so I approached the topic philosophically, trying to zoom in on what a true self means. One perspective that I gained was that we are actually a bunch of different selves. Another insight was that many truths are organized around goals; once you have a goal in mind, you can judge the strategies and their concomitant truths based on how well they support the goal. Different goals meant different selves. I think people will feel an affinity to one self over another based on emotion, but truths of feeling were suspect to my hyper-rationalist mind. Perhaps because I lacked that connection, I didn't see any legitimate way to judge goals–they all seemed equally valid. My conclusion was that we are a writhing, constantly changing community of selves, and no individual self has more fundamental claim to authenticity than any other.

Later, I discovered Buddhism, and it provided some satisfying perspectives. It observes that each self is ultimately trying to gain happiness. It also observes that long-term happiness is possible, and it is better than short-term happiness. It also focuses on testing the hypothesis that happiness is something that you create for yourself. This means that it is concerned with what you do and your skills. Buddhism then points out that the highest goal would be true happiness, one that is so long-term that it doesn't change on you, doesn't need maintenance. But even if you don't buy that true happiness is possible, the goal of long*er*-term happiness provides a universal basis upon which we can all judge our various selves. Importantly, the Buddha explicitly set aside the question of Who is your true self, indicating that the line of questioning isn't fruitful.

This approach sidesteps the question of What is your true self but still satisfies the question that motivated my obsession with authenticity: what should I do with my life, and why? Rather than telling me who my true self was, it gave me a goal to be true to, and supported the idea that I would get there by my actions. It ordered the writhing community of selves as a ladder: you hold on to one self, one rung of the ladder, as it serves you, then let go of that self when you can reach a higher rung–a self capable of sustaining longer-term happiness. True self or the lack thereof is set aside, but the quality of truthfulness remains.

We won't get far looking for an ultimate definition of what something or someone is, but we can still use sketches and judge them in the context of our quest for long-term happiness. Sketches are dependent on limited information and are useful only in a narrow circumstance. Recognizing this gives you flexibility and power. Rather than assume a technique to determine the true qualities of a person is getting at an ultimate truth, you can see it as serving different strategies for happiness inside, different committee members in your mind. That means you aren't immediately beholden to a particular technique, and can consider it critically. You can ask what you get out of looking at a person or yourself in a certain way, and the drawbacks of that perspective. Ensuring that these sketches are aligned with our ultimate goal is part of truthfulness.

For example, you can use appearance and music choice as a basis for someone's identity, considering their aesthetic choices day to day. This can be fun and interesting, but it doesn't get at whether you can trust someone, whether you would want to learn from them. It doesn't provide a good handle for judging a long-term relationship with a person, and when used as a view on yourself, it isn't especially useful for building long-term happiness. Alternatively, you can look at the kind of help that they give, their loyalty, whether they have gratitude, whether they pay their debts, their honesty, their commitment to harmlessness or lack thereof, how and whether they can convince themselves to do the right thing when it is hard, or stop doing the wrong thing. Those and other elements of good character form a basis for trust and are worth emulating. You have to evaluate if the things you're paying attention to are relevant to long-term happiness.

---

Authenticity is defined as someone truly being what they are said to be. That definition has two parts: the true qualities of a person and the claim to be a certain way. We've considered the first part, the limits and strategies of ascertaining the true qualities of an individual. Then there is the claim.

When we say someone is inauthentic, we mean that _they_ have made a claim and _they_ have failed to live up to it. When looking at verifiable claims like this, the majority are the ones we make internally. Sometimes we tell ourselves that we embody a certain characteristic. Sometimes we do something with the intention of appearing a certain way.

When we make a claim about ourselves to ourselves, it's important to revisit the limitations and strategy behind our sketches. If we're interested in long-term happiness and agree that our actions will take us there, we have to develop toward the goal. If you say you're already good at something, you emphasize positive qualities and ignore other areas where you can improve. When you say you're bad at something, you ignore or downplay the potential you have to improve. A useful claim that avoids these extremes is the learner, which recognizes your potentials, emphasizes your desire to develop the good ones, and allows for the fact that you might not be there yet. It's still a positive claim: you have duties as a learner, and if you abandon them, your claim to be a learner would be inauthentic. But it's a good claim to make, because living up to it ostensibly makes you a happier person.

When we try to appear some way, authenticity demands that we consider fidelity to an underlying truth. Our intention to appear some way constitutes a claim, and so we can feel dishonest if we aren't in line with or don't know the person we are. I've thought of inauthenticity as a rickety foundation, but I've also heard the feeling described as being chained by the claims we make. This can be tricky when we're trying to grow into a different role, because our underlying truth is that we are not yet there, but the external environment can demand that we act as though we are. We don't have the necessary characteristics in droves, but we have them in part, and we are developing them. If you intend to appear as a learner, you can maintain part of your integrity.

Another strategy is to shift your focus from presentation–who you are–to what you do, and why you do it. For example, instead of focusing on your brand, focus on providing beneficial help and avoiding harm, the way you know how. Your brand, your form, will evolve naturally from your actions, your function. However, you won't be in the awkward position of having claimed who you are, so your integrity is protected. This is an approach to "show up as your authentic self." It avoids choosing from the various selves inside, then presenting the "truest" one. Rather than pretending to be something you're not, you're simply trying something new.

When we consider external claims, a problem arises. People rarely explicitly claim to be a certain way, yet we still judge their authenticity. This can be problematic: we shoehorn someone into an identity and then judge them as inauthentic when they deviate from the label we gave them. The error is ours, the inauthenticity is a property of our label, not their behavior, but we mistakenly say that the person is inauthentic. We need to remember who is making the claim before we judge someone as dishonest.

If we depend on a person being a certain way and they change, it can hurt, can feel like betrayal. If we use the hypothesis that our own actions lead to our happiness or lack thereof, we look at what we're doing, and see that the problem isn't that they changed, it's that we started to cling to something that isn't always true. We spend most of our time looking for something true outside and ignore that these things will change, and so we are also setting ourselves up for pain when they do. If we want long-term happiness that we're responsible for, we have to change our strategy from looking outside for things to depend on, and start building reliable truths from the inside out.
